PaleoCalendarAdjust
===================

**Work-in-progress versions of programs for calculating orbitally determined paleo month lengths, and using these to adjust CMIP5/PMIP3-formatted paleo simulation files that were created by summarizing data using a fixed modern calendar.**

The material below describes the "paleo calendar effect" -- the impact that the changes in the length of months or seasons over time, related to the changes in the eccentricity of Earth's orbit and to precession, has on summarization of paleoclimatic model output. This is followed by a description of an approach implemented by Fortran programs (and modules), that can be used to determine the changing length of months (on various calendars) over time, and to adjust existing data sets in the "CMIP5" format to an appropriate paleo calendar.

The paleo calendar effect in PMIP4 time-slice and transient experiments: overall impact and strategies for data analysis
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abstract

The "paleo calendar effect" is a common expression for the impact that the changes in the length of months or seasons over time, related to changes in the eccentricity of Earth's orbit and precession, have on the summarization of climate-model output. This effect can have significant implications for paleoclimate analyses. In particular, using a "fixed-length" definition of months (i.e. defined by a fixed number of days), as opposed to a "fixed-angular" definition (i.e. defined by a fixed number of degrees of the Earth's orbit), leads to comparisons of data from different positions along the Earth's orbit when comparing paleo with modern simulations. This effect can impart characteristic spatial patterns or "signals" in comparisons of time-slice simulations that otherwise might be interpreted in terms of specific paleoclimatic mechanisms, and we provide examples for 6, 97, 116, and 127 ka. The calendar effect is exacerbated in transient climate simulations, where, in addition to spatial "map-pattern" effects, it can influence the apparent timing of extrema in individual time series and the characterization of phase relationships among series. We outline an approach for "adjusting" paleo simulations that have been summarized using a modern fixed-length definition of months and that can also be used for summarizing and comparing data archived as daily data. We describe the implementation of this approach in a set of Fortran 90 programs and modules.

### 1 Introduction

The calendar effect arises from a consequence of Kepler's second law of planetary motion: Earth moves faster along its elliptical orbit near perihelion, and slower near aphelion. Because the time of year of perihelion and aphelion vary over time, the length of time that it takes the Earth to traverse one-quarter or one-twelfth of its orbit (a nominal season or month) also varies, so that months are shorter near perihelion and longer near aphelion. When examining present day and paleo simulations, summarizing data using a fixed-length definition of a particular month (e.g. January as the first 31 days of a 365-day year), as opposed to a "fixed-angular" definition (e.g. (31/365.2425)•360 degrees of orbit), will therefore result in comparing conditions that prevailed over different portions of the Earth's orbit.

The impact of the calendar effect on the analysis of paleoclimatic simulations and their comparison with present-day or "control" simulations is well known and not trivial (e.g. Kutzbach and Gallimore, 1988; Joussaume and Braconnot, 1997). The effect is large and spatially variable and can produce apparent map patterns that might otherwise be interpreted as evidence of, for example, latitudinal amplification or damping of temperature changes, development of continental/marine temperature contrasts, interhemispheric contrasts (the "bipolar see-saw"), changes in the latitude of the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ), variations in strength of the global monsoon, and others. In transient climate-model simulations, time series of data aggregated using a fixed modern calendar, as opposed to an appropriately changing one, can differ not only in the overall shape of long-term trends in the series, but also in variations in the timing of, for example, Holocene "thermal maxima" which, depending on the time of year, can be on the order of several thousand years. The impact arises not only from the orbitally controlled changes in insolation amount and the length of months or seasons, but also from the advancement or delay in the starting and ending days of months or seasons relative to the solstices. Even if daily data are available, the calendar effect must still be considered when summarizing those data by months or seasons, or when calculating climatic indices such as the mean temperature of the warmest or coldest month---values that are often used for comparisons with paleoclimatic observations (see Kageyama et al., 2018, for further discussion).

Various approaches have been proposed for incorporating the calendar effect or "adjusting" monthly values in analyses of paleoclimatic simulations (e.g. Pollard and Reusch, 2002; Timm et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2011). Despite this work, the calendar effect is generally ignored, and so our motivation here is to provide an adjustment method that is relatively simple and can be applied generally to "CMIP5-formatted" (<https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/projects/cmip5/>) files, such as those distributed by the Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project (PMIP). Our approach (broadly similar to Pollard and Reusch, 2002) involves 1) determining the appropriate fixed-angular month lengths for a paleo experiment (e.g., Kutzbach and Gallimore, 1988), 2) interpolating the data to a daily time step using a mean-preserving interpolation method (e.g., Epstein, 1991), and then 3) averaging or accumulating the interpolated daily data using the appropriate (paleo) month starting and ending days, thereby explicitly incorporating the changing month lengths. In cases where daily data are available (e.g. in CMIP5/PMIP3 "day" files), only the third step is necessary. This approach is implemented in a set of Fortran 90 programs and modules (described below). With a suitable program code "wrapper" file, the approach can also be applied to transient simulations (e.g. Liu et al., 2009; Ivanovic et al., 2016).

In the following discussion we describe a) the calendar effect on month lengths and their beginning, middle and ending days over the past 150 kyr; b) the spatial patterns of the calendar effect on temperature and precipitation rate for several key times (6, 97, 116, and 127 ka), and c) the methods that can be used to calculate month lengths (on various calendars) and to "calendar adjust" monthly or daily paleo model output to an appropriate paleo calendar.

### 2 Month-length variations

The fixed-angular length of months as they vary over time can be calculated using the algorithm in Appendix A of Kutzbach and Gallimore (1988). This algorithm yields the length of time (in days, or fractions thereof) required to traverse a given number of degrees of celestial (as opposed to geographical) longitude starting from the vernal equinox, the common "origin" for orbital calculations (see Jousaumme and Braconnot, 1997, for discussion). Although developed for a 360-day year with 30-day months, the algorithm can easily be adapted for other calendars and for cases where the present-day months are not equal in length. The beginnings and ends of each fixed-angular month in a 365-day "noleap" calendar (<http://cfconventions.org>) are shown at 1 kyr intervals for the past 150 kyr in Fig. 1. The month-length "anomalies" (i.e. long-term differences between paleo and present month lengths, with present defined as 1950 CE) are shown in color, with (paleo) months that are shorter than those at present in green shades, and months that are longer than those at present in blue shades. Not only do the lengths of fixed-angular months vary over time, but so do their middle, beginning and ending days (Fig. 2), with mid-month days that are closer to the June solstice indicated in orange and those that are farther from the June solstice in blue. The variations in month length (Fig. 1) obviously track the changing time of year of perihelion, while the beginning and ending days reflect the climatic precession parameter (Fig. 2).

The calendar effect is illustrated below for four times: 6 and 127 ka are the target times for the planned warm-interval *midHolocene* and *lig127k* CMIP6/PMIP4 (Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6/Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project Phase 4) simulations (Otto-Bliesner et al., 2017) and illustrate the calendar effects when perihelion occurs in the boreal summer or autumn (Fig. S1); 116 ka is the time of a proposed sensitivity experiment for the onset of glaciation (Otto-Bliesner et al., 2017), and illustrates the calendar effect when perihelion occurs in boreal winter; and 97 ka was chosen to illustrate an orbital configuration not represented by the other times (i.e. one with boreal spring months occurring closer to the June solstice).

At 6 ka, perihelion occurred in September (Fig. S1), and the months from May through October were shorter than today (Fig. 1), with the greatest differences in August (1.65 days shorter than present). This contraction of month lengths moved the middle of all of the months from April through December closer to the June solstice (Fig. 2), with the greatest difference in November (4.5 days closer to the June solstice, and so 4.5 days farther from the December solstice). At 127 ka, perihelion was in late June, and the months April through September were shorter than today (Fig. 1), with the greatest difference in July (3.23 days shorter than present). As at 6 ka, the shorter boreal summer months move the middle of the months between July and December closer to the June solstice (Fig. 2), with the greatest difference in September and October (12.4 and 12.3 days closer, respectively). At both 6 and 127 ka, the longer boreal winter months begin and end earlier in the year, placing the middle of January 3.3 (6 ka) and 4.3 (127 ka) days farther from the June solstice than at present. As can be noted on Figs. 1 and 2, 127 ka does not represent a simple amplification of 6 ka conditions. Although broadly similar in having shorter late boreal summer and autumn months that begin earlier in the year (and hence closer to the June solstice), the two times are only broadly similar in the relative differences from present in month length and beginning and ending days.

At 116 ka perihelion was in late December, and consequently the months from October through March were shorter than present (Fig. 1). This has the main effect of moving the middle of the months July through December farther from the June solstice (with a maximum in September of 5.6 days; Fig. 2), somewhat opposite to the pattern at 6 and 127 ka. At 97 ka, perihelion occurred in mid-November, in between its occurrence in September at 6 ka and December at 116 ka (Fig. 1). The impact on month length and mid-month timing is complicated, with the mid-month days of January through March and July through October occurring farther from the June solstice (Fig. 2).

The first-order impact of the calendar effect can be gauged by comparing (at a particular latitude) daily insolation values for mid-month days determined using the appropriate paleo calendar (which assumes fixed-angular definitions of months) with insolation values for mid-month days using the present-day calendar (which assumes fixed-length definitions of months). At 6 ka, at 45°N, the shorter (than present), but earlier (relative to the June solstice) months of September through November had insolation values over 10 Wm<sup>-2</sup> greater for mid-month days defined using the fixed-angular paleo calendar, in comparison with values determined using the fixed-length present-day calendar (Fig. 3), and at 127 ka, the differences exceeded 35 Wm<sup>-2</sup> for the months of August through October. These positive insolation differences were accompanied by negative differences from January through June. At 116 ka, the longer but later occurring month of September had a negative difference in mid-month insolation that exceeded 10 Wm<sup>-2</sup>. For regions where surface temperatures are strongly tied to insolation with little lag, such as the interiors of the northern continents, these calendar effects on insolation will directly be reflected by the calendar effects on temperatures. By moving the beginning, middle and end of individual months (and seasons) closer to or farther from the solstices, the "apparent temperature" of those intervals will be affected (i.e. months or seasons that start or end closer to the summer solstice will be warmer). The calendar effect on insolation varies strongly with latitude, with the sign of the difference broadly reversing in the southern hemisphere (Figs. S2 and S3).

### 3 Impact of the calendar effect

The impact on the analysis of paleoclimatic simulations of the calendar effect can be assessed by assuming that the long-term mean difference in climate (also referred to as the experiment minus control "anomaly") is zero everywhere, illustrating the "pure" calendar effect. (Past demonstrations of the calendar effect have used "real" paleoclimatic simulations, and so the patterns include both the calendar effect, and the long-term mean differences in climate between experiment and control simulations.) Pseudo-daily interpolated values (or actual daily output, if available) of present-day monthly data can then simply be reaggregated using an appropriate paleo calendar and compared with the present-day data. (The pseudo-daily values used here were obtained by interpolating monthly data to a daily time-step using the monthly mean-preserving algorithm described below.)

The "pure" calendar effect is demonstrated here using present-day monthly long-term mean (1981-2010) values of near-surface air temperature (*tas*) from the Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR; Saha et al., 2010; <https://esgf.nccs.nasa.gov/projects/ana4mips/>), and monthly precipitation rate (*precip*) from the CPC Merged Analysis of Precipitation (CMAP; Xie and Arkin, 1997; <https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/data/gridded/data.cmap.html>) (Fig. S4). (These data were chosen because they are global in extent, and are of reasonably high spatial resolution.) If it is assumed that there is no long-term mean difference between a present-day and paleo simulation (by adopting the present-day data as the simulated paleo data), then the unadjusted present-day data can be compared with present-day data adjusted to the appropriate paleo month lengths. The calendar-adjusted minus unadjusted differences will therefore reveal the inverse of the built-in calendar effect "signal" in the unadjusted data, that might readily be interpreted in terms of some specific paleoclimatic mechanisms, while being instead a data analytical artifact. Positive values on the maps (Figs. 4-6) indicate, for example, where temperatures would be higher or precipitation greater if a fixed-angular calendar were used to summarize the paleo data.

#### 3.1 Monthly temperature

The impacts of using the appropriate calendar to summarize the data (as opposed to not) are large, often exceeding 1°C in absolute value (Fig. 4). The effects are spatially variable, and not simple functions of latitude as might be initially expected, because the effect increases with the amplitude of the annual cycle (which has a substantial longitudinal component) for temperature regimes that are in phase with the annual cycle of insolation. For temperature regimes that are out of phase with insolation, the effect would be negative, and largest when the temperature variations were exactly out of phase. (If there were no annual cycle, i.e. if a climate variable remained constant over the course of a year, the calendar effect would be zero.) The interaction between the annual cycle and the direct calendar effect on insolation produces patterns of the overall calendar effect that happen to resemble some of the large-scale responses that are frequently found in climate simulations, both past and future, such as high-latitude amplification or damping, continental-ocean contrasts, interhemispheric contrasts and changes in seasonality of temperature (c.f. Izumi et al., 2013). Because the month-length calculations use the Northern Hemisphere vernal equinox as a fixed origin for the location of Earth along its orbit, the effects seem to be small during the months surrounding the equinox (i.e. February through April, Fig. 4), and indeed the selection of a different origin would produce different apparent effects (see Jousaumme and Braconnot, 1997, sec. 2.1). However, the selection of a different origin would not change the relative length of time it would take Earth to transit any particular angular segment of its orbit.

At 6 ka, the largest calendar effects on temperature can be observed over the Northern Hemisphere continents for the months from September through December (Fig. 4), consistent with the earlier beginning of these months (Fig. 2) and the direct calendar effect on insolation at 45°N (Fig. 3). For example, in the interior of the northern continents, as well as North Africa, temperature is in phase with insolation, and so the calendar effect on insolation (Fig. 3), which is strongly positive from August through November, is reflected by the calendar effect on temperature. Over the northern oceans, temperature is broadly in phase with insolation, but with a lag, which reduces the magnitude of the effect and gives rise to an apparent land-ocean contrast that otherwise might be interpreted in terms of some particular paleoclimatic mechanism. The calendar effect on temperature from January through March is negative in the northern continental interiors (Fig. 4), which is also consistent with the calendar effect on insolation. In the Southern Hemisphere at 6 ka, the calendar effects on temperature are generally negative, which is consistent with the calendar effects on mid-month insolation at 45°S (Fig. S3), which are generally negative throughout the year, particularly during the months of August through November. Like the continent -- ocean contrast in the Northern Hemisphere, the Northern Hemisphere -- Southern Hemisphere contrast in the calendar effect on temperature also could be interpreted in terms of one or another of the mechanisms thought to be responsible for interhemispheric temperature contrasts.

At 127 ka, the calendar effect on temperature is broadly similar to that at 6 ka over the months from September through March, but differs in sign from April through July, and in magnitude in August (Fig. 4). These patterns are also consistent with the direct calendar effects on insolation. At 127 ka, the calendar effect on insolation becomes positive in the Northern Hemisphere earlier in the northern summer than at 6 ka (Fig. 3), while at 45°S the calendar effect on insolation becomes strongly negative in July and persists that way through November (Fig. S3). At 116 ka, perihelion occurs in late December, in comparison to late June at 127 ka (Figs. 1 and S1), and not surprisingly the calendar effect on temperature is nearly the inverse of that at 127 ka (Fig. 4). This pattern has important implications for paleoclimatic studies, because in addition to all of the changes in the forcing and the paleoclimatic responses accompanying the transition out of the last interglacial, the possibility that some of the apparent simulated changes between 127 and 116 ka may be an artifact of data-analysis procedures cannot be discounted.

At 97 ka, a time selected to illustrate a different orbital configuration (i.e. one with boreal spring months occurring closer to the June solstice) than the similar (6 ka and 127 ka) or contrasting (127 and 116 ka) configurations, the calendar effect on temperature in the Northern Hemisphere (Fig. 4) shows a switch from positive in the early boreal summer (May and June) to negative in the late summer (August and September). This switch is again consistent with the direct calendar effect on insolation (Fig. 3). Like the other times, the spatial variations in the calendar effect could easily be interpreted in terms of one kind of paleoclimatic mechanism or another.

#### 3.2 Mean temperature of the warmest and coldest months

Although the calendar effects on monthly mean temperature show some sub-continental scale variability, the overall patterns are of relatively large spatial scales, and are interpretable in terms of the direct orbital effects on month lengths and insolation. The calendar effects on the mean temperature of the warmest (MTWA) and coldest (MTCO) months (and their differences) are much more spatially variable (Fig. 5). This variability arises in large part because of the way these variables are usually defined (e.g. as the mean temperature of the warmest or coldest conventionally defined month, as opposed to the temperature of the warmest or coldest 30-day interval), but also because the calendar adjustment can result in a change in the specific month that is warmest or coldest. These effects are compounded when calculating seasonality (as MTWA minus MTCO). In the particular set of example times chosen here, the magnitudes of the calendar effects are also smaller than those of individual months because, as it happens, the calendar effects in January and February (typically coldest months in the Northern Hemisphere) and July and August (typically warmest months in the Northern Hemisphere) are not large. There are also some surprising patterns. The inverse relationship between the calendar effects at 116 ka and 127 ka that might be expected from inspection of the monthly effects (Fig. 4) are not present, while the calendar effects on MTCO and MTWA at 97 ka and 116 ka tend to resemble one another. Across the four example times, there is an indistinct, but still noticeable pattern in reduced seasonality (MTWA minus MTCO) between the adjusted and unadjusted values, which like the other patterns described above could tempt interpretation in terms of some specific mechanisms.

#### 3.3 Monthly precipitation

In contrast to the large spatial-scale patterns of the calendar effect on temperature, the patterns of the calendar effect on precipitation rate are much more complex, showing both continental-scale patterns (like those for temperature), but also features that are apparently related to precipitation associated with the ITCZ and regional and global monsoons (Fig. 6). The first pattern is evident in the similar calendar effects at 6 and 127 ka, particularly in the months from September through November (Fig. 6), where it also can be noted (especially over the mid-latitude continents in both hemispheres) that there is a positive association with the calendar effect on temperature. This association is related simply to similarities in the shapes of the annual cycles of those variables, and not to some kind of thermodynamic constraint. At 116 ka, as for temperature, the large-scale calendar-effect patterns appear to be nearly the inverse of those at 127 ka. The second pattern is well illustrated at 127 ka in the tropical North Atlantic, sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia. There, a negative calendar effect can be noted for June through August, giving way to a positive effect from September through November, and the same transition appears inversely at 116 ka. Another example can be found in the South Pacific Convergence Zone in austral spring and early summer (September through November) at 6 and 127 ka. This second kind of pattern, most evident in the subtropics, is not mirrored by the calendar effects on temperature.

Overall, the magnitude and spatial patterns of the calendar effects on temperature and precipitation (Figs. 4-6) resemble those in the paleoclimatic simulations and observations that we attempt to explain in mechanistic terms. Depending on the sign of the effect, neglecting to account for the calendar effects could spuriously amplify some "signals" in long-term mean differences between experiment and control simulations, while damping others.

#### 3.4 Calendar effects and transient experiments

Calendar effects must also be considered in the analysis of transient climate-model simulations (even if those data are available on the daily time step). This can be illustrated for a variety of variables and regions using data from the TraCE-21k transient simulations (Liu et al., 2009; <https://www.earthsystemgrid.org/project/trace.html>). The series plotted in Fig. 7 are area-averages for individual months on a yearly time step, with 100-yr (window half-width) locally weighted regression curves added to emphasize century-timescale variations. The original yearly time-step data were aggregated using a perpetual "no leap" (365-day) calendar (using the present-day month lengths for all years). The gray and black curves on Fig. 7 show these unadjusted "original" values, while the colored curves show month-length adjusted values (i.e. daily interpolated values, reaggregated using the appropriate paleo calendar). Area averages were calculated for ice-free land points.

Figure 7a shows area-weighted averages for 2-m air temperature for a region that spans 15 to 75°N and ‑170 to 60 °E, the region used by Marsicek et al. (2018) to discuss Holocene temperature trends in simulations and reconstructions. The largest differences between month-length adjusted values and unadjusted values occur in October between 14 and 6 ka, when perihelion occurred during the northern summer months. October month lengths during this interval were generally within one day of those at present (Fig. 1), but the generally shorter months from April through September resulted in Octobers beginning up to ten days earlier in the calendar than at present, i.e. closer in time to the boreal summer solstice (Fig 2). The calendar-effect adjusted October values therefore average up to 4°C higher than the unadjusted values during this interval (Fig. 7a), consistent with the direct calendar effects on insolation at 45°N (Fig. 3). The calendar effect also changes the shape of the temporal trends in the data, particularly during the Holocene. October temperatures in the unadjusted data showed a generally increasing trend over the Holocene (i.e. since 11.7 ka), reaching a maximum around 3 ka, comparable with present-day values, while the adjusted data reached levels consistently above present-day values by 7.5 ka. The unadjusted October temperature data could be described as reaching a "Holocene thermal maximum" only in the late Holocene (i.e., after 4 ka), while the adjusted data displays more of a mid-Holocene maximum. As is the case with the mapped assessments of the "pure" calendar effect, the differences between unadjusted and adjusted time series are of the kind that could be interpreted in terms of various hypothetical mechanisms. For example, the calendar-effect adjustment advances the time of occurrence of a Holocene thermal maximum in October by about 3 kyr.

As in North America and Europe, the adjusted temperature trends in Australia (10 to 50°S and 110 to 160°E) (Fig. 7b) are consistent with the direct calendar effects on insolation (i.e. for 45°S, Fig. S3). The difference between adjusted and unadjusted values are again largest in October between 14 and 6 ka, but the difference is the inverse of that for the North America and Europe region, because the annual cycle of temperature for Australia is inversely related to the annual cycle of the insolation anomalies (Fig. S7) and so to the direct calendar effects on insolation (Fig. S3). Again, the shapes of the Holocene trends in the adjusted and unadjusted data are noticeably different. In the Australia (Fig. 7b) and North America and Europe (Fig. 7a) examples, relatively large areas are being averaged, and the calendar effect becomes more apparent as the size of the area decreases. Notably, the effect does not completely disappear at the largest scales, i.e. for area-weighted averages for the globe (for ice-free land grid cells) (Fig. 7c). The differences are smaller, but still discernable.

In the Northern Hemisphere (African-Asian) Monsoon region (0 to 30°N and ‑30 to 120°E), the calendar effects on precipitation rate are similar to those on temperature in the midlatitudes because the annual cycle of precipitation is roughly in phase with that of insolation (Fig. S5). There is little effect in the winter and spring, but a substantial effect in summer and autumn over the interval from 17 ka to about 3 ka (Fig. 7d). The calendar effect reverses sign between July and August (when the month-length adjusted precipitation rate values are less than the unadjusted ones) and September and October (when the adjusted values are greater than the unadjusted ones). In July, the timing of relative maxima and minima in the two data sets is similar, while in October, in particular, the Holocene precipitation maximum is several thousand years earlier in the adjusted data than in the unadjusted.

The time-series expression of the latitudinally reversing calendar effect on precipitation rate evident in Fig. 6 (e.g. July vs. October at 127 ka) can be illustrated by comparing precipitation or precipitation minus evaporation (*P - E*) for the North African (sub-Saharan) Monsoon region (5 to 17°N and ‑5 to 30°E) with the Mediterranean region (31 to 43°N and -5 to 30°E) (Figs. 7e and 7f). The differences between the adjusted and unadjusted data in the North African region (Fig. 7e) parallels that of the larger monsoon region (Fig. 7d). The Mediterranean region, which is characteristically moister in winter and drier in summer shows the reverse pattern: when the adjusted minus unadjusted *P - E* difference is positive in the monsoon region, it is negative in the Mediterranean region. Dipoles are frequently observed in climatic data, both present-day and paleo, and usually interpreted in terms of broad-scale circulation changes in the atmosphere or ocean. This example illustrates that they could also be artifacts of the calendar effect. Such changes in timing of extrema also could influence the interpretation of phase relationships among simulated time series and time series of potential forcing (Joussaume and Braconnot, 1997; Timm et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2011). The impacts of the calendar effect on temporal trends in transient simulations (Fig. 7), when compounded by the spatial effects (Figs. 4-6), makes it even more likely spurious climatic mechanisms could be inferred in analyzing transient simulations than in the simpler time-slice simulations.

### 4 Methods

The approach we describe here for adjusting model output reported either as monthly data (using fixed-length definitions of months) or as daily data to reflect the calendar effect (i.e. to make month-length adjustments) has two fundamental steps: 1) pseudo-daily interpolation of the data on a fixed-month-length calendar (which, when actual daily data are available, is not necessary), followed by 2) aggregation of those data to fixed-angular months defined for the particular time of the simulations. The second step obviously requires the calculation of the beginning and ending days of each month as they vary over ("geological") time, which in turn depends on the orbital parameters. The definition of the beginning and ending days of a month in a "leap-year," "Gregorian," or "proleptic Gregorian" calendar (<http://cfconventions.org>) additionally depends on the timing of the (northern) vernal equinox, which varies from year to year. The pseudo-daily interpolation method is described first, followed by a discussion of the month-length calculations. Then the calendar-adjustment program is described, along with a few demonstration programs that exercise some of the individual procedures. All of the programs, written in Fortran 90, are available (see *Code and data availability* section).

#### 4.1 Pseudo-daily interpolation

The first step in adjusting monthly time-step model output to reflect the calendar effect is to interpolate the monthly data (either long-term means or time-series data) to pseudo-daily values. (A step that is not required if the data are daily time-step values.) It turns out that the most common way of producing pseudo-daily values, linear interpolation between monthly means, is not mean preserving; the monthly (or annual) means of the interpolated daily values will generally not match the original monthly values. An alternative approach, and the one we use here, is the mean-preserving "harmonic" interpolation method of Epstein (1991), which is easy to implement, and performs the same function as the parabolic-spline interpolation method of Pollard and Reusch (2002).

The linear and mean-preserving interpolation methods can be compared using the Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR) near-surface air temperature and CPC Merged Analysis of Precipitation (CMAP) 1981-2010 long-term mean data (Fig. S8). A typical example for temperature appears in Fig. S8a, for a gridpoint near Madison, Wisconsin (USA). The difference between the annual mean values of the interpolated data for the two approaches is small and similar (ca. 2.0 × 10<sup>-6</sup>), but the difference between the original monthly means and the monthly mean of the linearly interpolated daily values can exceed 0.8 °C in some months (e.g. December). (The differences for the mean-preserving interpolation method are always less than 1.0 × 10<sup>-3</sup>). Fig S8b shows an example for a grid point in Australia, where again the difference between the original monthly means and the monthly means of the linearly interpolated daily values is not negligible (i.e. 0.4 °C). Similar results hold for precipitation (Fig. S8c), where the difference can exceed 0.1 mm d<sup>-1</sup>). Like other harmonic-based approaches, the Epstein approach can create interpolated curves that are wavy (see Pollard and Reusch (2002) for discussion), but these effects are small enough to not be practically important in nearly all cases. The pathological case for precipitation is shown in Fig S8d, at a grid point in the Indian Ocean. Here, the difference between an original monthly mean value and one calculated using the mean-preserving interpolation method reaches 0.12 mm d<sup>-1</sup> in March and April, but the differences between the original monthly means and the monthly means of the linearly interpolated daily values are nearly three times larger.

The map patterns of the interpolation errors (the monthly mean values recalculated using the pseudo-daily interpolated values minus the original values) appear in Fig. S9. (Note the differing scales for the linear-interpolation errors and the mean-preserving-interpolation errors.) The linear interpolation errors are quite large, with absolute values exceeding 1°C and 1 mm d<sup>-1</sup> and have distinct seasonal and spatial patterns: underpredictions of Northern Hemisphere temperature in summer (and overpredictions in winter), and underpredictions of precipitation in the wet season (e.g. southern Asia in July) and overpredictions in the dry season (southern Asia in May). The magnitude and patterns of these effects again rival those we attempt to infer or interpret in the paleo record. The mean-preserving interpolation errors for temperature are very small, and show only vague spatial patterns (note the differing scales). The errors for precipitation are also quite small, but can be locally larger, as in the pathological case illustrated above. However, the map patterns of the interpolation errors strongly suggest that those cases are not practically important.

The mean-preserving interpolation method is implemented in the Fortran 90 module named `pseudo_daily_interp_subs.f90` The subroutine `hdaily(...)` manages the interpolation, first getting the harmonic coefficients (Eq. 6 of Epstein, 1991) using the subroutine names `harmonic_coeffs(...)` and then applying these in the subroutine `xdhat(...)` to get the interpolated values.

#### 4.2 Month-length calculations

Calculation of the length and the beginning, middle and ending (real-number or decimal) days of each month at a particular time is based on the algorithm described by Kutzbach and Gallimore (1988, see also Kutzbach and Otto-Bleisner, 1982). Application of this algorithm to a 360-day year requires as input eccentricity and the longitude of perihelion (in degrees) relative to the vernal equinox, and the generalization of the approach to other calendars, such as the "proleptic Gregorian" calendar (that includes leap years, <http://cfconventions.org>) also requires the (real-number or decimal) day of the vernal equinox. To calculate the orbital parameters using the Berger (1978) solution, and the timing of the (northern) vernal equinox (as well as insolation itself), we adapted a set of programs provided by National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Goddard Institute for Space Studies (<https://data.giss.nasa.gov/ar5/solar.html>).

The approach adopted by Kutzbach and Gallimore (1988) is based on an approximation that describes the rate of change in celestial longitude, *ϕ*, with time (over the year), which depends on eccentricity and the date of perihelion, expressed as a phase angle, *ϕ<sub>p</sub>*, defined so that sin((2π/360)(*ϕ - ϕ<sub>p</sub>*)) = ‑1 at the celestial longitude of perihelion (their equation A1). After *ϕ<sub>p</sub>* has been determined, the amount of time (in real-number or decimal days) required to traverse a given number of degrees of celestial longitude from the vernal equinox can be determined by an integration of A1 (their equation A2).

We implemented this approach in the subroutine `kg_monlen_360(...)` in the Fortran module named `month_length_subs.f90`. (This subroutine is not actually used in practice because it can handle only 360-day year calendars, but it illustrates the basic ideas.) After initializing a set of day numbers and angular differences from the vernal equinox (assumed to be fixed at 80 days after the beginning of the year) (Step 1 in `kg_monlen_360(...)`), we determine *ϕ<sub>p</sub>* by advancing along the orbit at 0.001-day increments from the vernal equinox, and selecting *ϕ<sub>p</sub>* as the value that minimizes ‑1 ‑sin((2π/360)(*ϕ - ϕ<sub>p</sub>*)) (Step 2). Then the traverse time since the vernal equinox is calculated for each day using Kutzbach and Gallimore's (1988) equation A2 (Step 3), and this traverse time is used to get the relative length of each day through simple differencing (Step 4). Finally, the length of each month (in decimal days), is determined by accumulation (Step 5).

#### 4.3 Simulation ages and simulation years

Inspection shows that different climate models employ different starting dates in their output files for both present-day (*piControl*) and paleo (e.g. *midHolocene*) simulations. For models that use a noleap (constant 365-day year) calendar, such as CCSM4, the starting date is not an issue, but for MPI-ESM-P, which uses a proleptic Gregorian calendar, or CNRM-CM5, with a "standard" (i.e. mixed Julian/Gregorian) calendar as examples, the specific starting date influences the date of the vernal equinox through the occurrence of individual leap years. For example, in the CMIP5/PMIP4 *midHolocene* simulations, output from MPI-ESM-P starts in 1850 CE, and that from CNRM-CM5 in 2050 CE (and it can be verified that leap years in those output files occur in a fashion consistent with the "modern" calendar). Consequently, we need to make a distinction between two notions of time here: 1) the simulation age, expressed in (negative) years BP (i.e. before 1950 CE), and 2) the simulation year, expressed in years CE. The simulation age controls the orbital parameter values, while the simulation year, along with the specification of the CF-compliant calendar attribute (<http://cfconventions.org>), controls the date and time of the vernal equinox.

#### 4.4 Month-length programs and subprograms

Month lengths are calculated in the subroutine, `get_month_lengths(...)` (contained in the Fortran 90 module named `month_length_subs.f90`), that in turn calls the subroutine `kg_monlen(...)` to get real-valued month lengths for a particular simulation age and year. (The subroutine `get_month_lengths(...)`, can be exercised to produce tables of month lengths, beginning, middle and ending days of the kind used to produce Figs. 1-3 and S2-S7 using a driver program named `month_length.f90`.) The subroutine `get_month_lengths(...)` uses two other modules, `GISS_orbpar_subs.f90` and `GISS_orbpar_subs.f90` (based on programs downloaded from GISS (<https://data.giss.nasa.gov/ar5/solar.html>) to get the orbital parameters and vernal equinox dates.

The specific tasks involved in the calculation of either a single year's set of month lengths, or a series of month lengths for multiple years, include the following steps, implemented in `get_month_lengths(...)`:

1.  generate a set of "target" dates based on the simulation ages and simulation years;

2.  obtain the orbital parameters for 0 ka (1950 CE), which will be used to adjust the calculated month-length values to the conventional definition of months for 1950 CE as the reference year;

3.  obtain the present-day (i.e. 1950 CE) month lengths for the appropriate calendar.

Then loop over the simulation ages and simulation years, and for each combination:

4.  obtain the orbital parameters for each simulation age, using the subroutine `GISS_orbpars`;

5.  calculate real-valued month lengths for the appropriate calendar using `kg_monlen(...)`;

6.  adjust (using the subroutine `adjust_to_reference(...)`) those month length values to the reference year (e.g. 1950 CE) and its conventional set of month-length definitions so that, for example, January will have 31 days, February 28 or 29 days, etc. in that reference year;

7.  further adjust the month-length values to ensure that the individual monthly values will sum exactly to the year length in days using `adjust_to_yeartot(...)`;

8.  convert real-valued month lengths to integers using `integer_monlen(...)` (These integer values are not used anywhere, but may be useful in conceptualizing the pattern of month-length variations over time.);

9.  determine the mid-March day, using `GISS_srevents(...)` to get the vernal equinox date for calendars in which it varies;

10. calculate real- and integer-valued beginning, middle and ending days using `imon_midbegend(...)` and `rmon_midbegend(...)` for integer- and real-number definitions of the months.

#### 4.5 Month-length tables and time series

Tables and time series of month lengths, beginning, middle and ending days, and dates of the vernal equinox can be calculated using the program `month_length.f90`. This program reads an "info file" (`month_length_info.csv`) consisting of an identifying output file name prefix, the calendar type, the beginning and ending simulation age (in years BP), and the age step, and the beginning simulation year (in years CE) and the number of simulation years.

### 5 Paleo calendar adjustment

The objective of the principal calendar-adjustment program `cal_adjust_PMIP3.f90` is to read and clone a "CMIP5/PMIP3"-formatted netCDF file, replacing the original monthly or daily data with calendar-adjusted data, i.e. data aggregated using a fixed-angular calendar appropriate for a particular paleo experiment. In the case of monthly input data, either climatological long-term means or monthly time-series, the data are first interpolated to a daily time step, and then reaggregated to a monthly time-step mean values using an appropriate paleo calendar. In the case of daily input data, the interpolation step is obviously unneeded, and so the data are simply aggregated to the monthly time step. In both cases, new time-coordinate variables are created (consistent with the paleo calendar), and all other dimension information, coordinate variables and global attributes are copied, and augmented by other attribute data that indicate that the data have been adjusted. The reading and rewriting of the netCDF file is handled by subroutines in a module named `CMIP5_netCDF_subs.f90` and various modules and subprograms for month-length calculations described above are also used here.

#### 5.1 Interpolation and (re)aggregation

The pseudo-daily interpolation and (re)aggregation is done using two subroutines `mon_to_day_ts(...)` and `day_to_mon_ts(...)` in the module `calendar_effects_subs.f90`. The pseudo-daily interpolation is done a year at a time, creating slight discontinuities between one year and the next. The subroutine `mon_to_day_ts(...)` has options for smoothing those discontinuities, and restoring the long-term mean of the interpolated daily data to that of the original monthly data.

The (re)aggregation of the daily data is also done a year at a time by collecting the daily data for a particular year, and "padding" it at the beginning and end with data from the previous and following year (to accommodate the fact that under some orbital configurations the first day of the current year may occur in the previous year, or the last day in the following year (Fig. 1). For example, at 6 ka, the changes in the shape of the orbit and the consequently longer months from January through March (32.5, 29.5 and 32.4 days, respectively) displaces the beginning of January four days into the previous year, with the last day of December consequently falling just before day 361 in a 365-day year. In the case of long-term mean "climatological" data ("Aclim" data), the padding is done with ending and beginning days of the single year of pseudo-daily data.

The calculation of monthly means is done by calculating weighted averages of the days that overlap with a particular month as defined by the (real-value or decimal) beginning and ending days of that month (from the subroutine `get_month_lengths(...)`). Each whole day in that interval gets a weight of 1.0, and each partial day gets a weight proportional to its part of a whole day.

#### 5.2 Processing individual netCDF files

At present, the program reads an "info file" that provides file and variable names, simulation ages, etc., and this info file will be easily modified to accommodate "CMIP6/PMIP4" formatted files (<https://pcmdi.llnl.gov/CMIP6/Guide/modelers.html#5-model-output-requirements>) as they become available. The fields in the info file include (for each netCDF file), the variable (e.g. "tas", "pr"), the "realm plus time frequency" type (e.g. "Amon", "Aclim", ...), the model name, the experiment name (e.g. "midHolocene"), the ensemble member (e.g. "r1i1p1"), and the simulation year beginning date and ending date (as a YYYYMM or YYYYMMDD string). An input filename "suffix" field is also read (which is usually blank, but is "-clim" for Aclim-type files), as is an output filename "suffix" field (e.g. "_cal_adj"), which is added to the output filename to indicate that it has been modified from the original. The info file also contains the simulation age beginning and end (in years BP), the increment between simulation ages (usually 1 in the application here), the beginning simulation year (years CE) and the number of simulation years. This information could also be gotten by parsing the netCDF file name and reading the calendar attribute and time-coordinate variables, but that would add to the complexity of the program.

The output netCDF files have the string "`_cal_adj`" appended to the end of the filename. In the case of monthly time series (e.g. "Amon") or long-term means (e.g. "Aclim") the file names are otherwise the same as the input data. In the case of the daily input data, with "day" as the "realm plus time frequency" string, that string is changed to "Amon2".

The adjustment of a file using `cal_adjust_PMIP3.f90` includes the following steps:

1.  read the info file, construct various file names, allocate month-length variables;

2.  generate month lengths using the subroutine `get_month_lengths(....)`;

3.  open input and output netCDF files; and for each file

4.  redefine the time-coordinate variable as appropriate using the subroutines `new_time_day(...)` and 'new_time_month(...)' in the module `CMIP5_netCDF_subs.f90`;

5.  create the new netCDF file, copy the dimension and global attributes from the input file using the subroutine `copy_dims_and_glatts(...)`, define the output variable using the subroutine `define_outvar(...)`;

6.  get the input variable to be adjusted;

7.  for each model grid point, get calendar-adjusted values as described above using the subroutines `mon_to_day_ts(...)` and `day_to_mon_ts(...)`;

8.  write out the adjusted data, and close the output file.

#### 5.3 Further examples

Five other main programs that serve as "drivers" for some of the subroutines or that demonstrate particular aspects of procedures used here are included in the GitHub repository for the programs (<https://github.com/pjbartlein/PaleoCalendarAdjust>):

-   `GISS_orbpar_driver.f90` and `GISS_srevents_driver.f90`; Main programs that call the subroutines `GISS_orbpars(...)` and `GISS_srevents(...)` to produce tables of orbital parameters and "solar events" like the dates of equinoxes, solstices and perihelion and aphelion.

-   `demo_01_pseudo_daily_interp.f90`; Main program that demonstrates linear and mean-preserving pseudo-daily interpolation.

-   `demo_02_adjust_1yr.f90`; Main program that demonstrates the paleo calendar adjustment of a single year's data.

-   `demo_03_adjust_TraCE_ts.f90`; Main program that demonstrates the adjustment of a 22040 year-long time series of monthly TraCE-21k data.

### 6 Summary

As has been done previously (e.g. Kutzbach and Otto-Bliesner, 1982; Kutzbach and Gallimore, 1988; Jousaumme and Braconnot, 1997; Pollard and Reusch, 2002; Timm et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2011; Kageyama et al., 2018), we have described the substantial impacts of the paleo calendar effect on the analysis of climate-model simulations, and provide what we hope to be a straightforward way of making adjustments that incorporate the effect. The interval between previous calls to include consideration of the calendar effect in paleoclimate analyses has ranged between three and nine years over the past nearly four decades, with a median interval of six years. The size and impact of the calendar effect warrant its consideration in the analysis of paleo simulations, and we hope that by providing a relatively easy-to-implement method, that will become the case.

*Code and data availability*

The GitHub repository for the code is at <https://github.com/pjbartlein/PaleoCalendarAdjust>. All climate data used here are available for download at the URLs cited in the text.

*Author contribution*

P.B. designed the study, developed the Fortran 90 programs, and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. Both authors contributed to the final version of the text.

*Acknowledgements*

This manuscript is a contribution to PMIP4. TraCE-21ka was made possible by the DOE INCITE computing program, and supported by NCAR, the NSF P2C2 program, and the DOE Abrupt Change and EaSM programs. CMAP precipitation data were provided by the NOAA/OAR/ESRL PSD, Boulder, Colorado, USA, from their Web site at <https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/>. CFSR near-surface air-temperature was obtained from <https://esgf.nccs.nasa.gov/projects/ana4mips/> data (for the original source see <http://cfs.ncep.noaa.gov>). Maps were prepared using NCL, the NCAR Command Language (Version 6.4.0) [Software]. (2017). Boulder, Colorado: UCAR/NCAR/CISL/TDD. <http://dx.doi.org/10.5065/D6WD3XH5>. S.S. was supported by the USGS Land Change Science Program. Any use of trade, firm, or product names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.

### References

Berger, A. L.: Long-term variations of daily insolation and Quaternary climatic changes, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 35, 2362-2367, [https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1978)035<2362:LTVODI>2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1978)035%3c2362:LTVODI%3e2.0.CO;2), 1978.

Chen, G.-S., Kutzbach, J. E., Gallimore, R., and Liu, Z.: Calendar effect on phase study in paleoclimate transient simulation with orbital forcing, Climate Dynamics, 37, 1949-1960, <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-010-0944-6>, 2011.

Epstein, E. S.: On obtaining daily climatological values from monthly means, Journal of Climate, 4, 365-368, [https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0442(1991)004<0365:OODCVF>2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0442(1991)004%3c0365:OODCVF%3e2.0.CO;2), 1991.

Ivanovic, R. F., Gregoire, L. J., Kageyama, M., Roche, D. M., Valdes, P. J., Burke, A., Drummond, R., Peltier, W. R., and Tarasov, L.: Transient climate simulations of the deglaciation 21--9 thousand years before present (version 1) -- PMIP4 Core experiment design and boundary conditions, Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 2563-2587, <https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-9-2563-2016>, 2016.

Izumi, K., Bartlein, P. J., and Harrison, S. P.: Consistent large-scale temperature responses in warm and cold climates, Geophysical Research Letters, 40, 1817-1823, <https://doi.org/10.1002/grl.50350>, 2013.

Joussaume, S. and Braconnot, P.: Sensitivity of paleoclimate simulation results to season definitions, Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres, 102, 1943-1956, <https://doi.org/10.1029/96JD01989>, 1997.

Kageyama, M., Braconnot, P., Harrison, S. P., Haywood, A. M., Jungclaus, J. H., Otto-Bliesner, B. L., Peterschmitt, J. Y., Abe-Ouchi, A., Albani, S., Bartlein, P. J., Brierley, C., Crucifix, M., Dolan, A., Fernandez-Donado, L., Fischer, H., Hopcroft, P. O., Ivanovic, R. F., Lambert, F., Lunt, D. J., Mahowald, N. M., Peltier, W. R., Phipps, S. J., Roche, D. M., Schmidt, G. A., Tarasov, L., Valdes, P. J., Zhang, Q., and Zhou, T.: The PMIP4 contribution to CMIP6 -- Part 1: Overview and over-arching analysis plan, Geosci. Model Dev., 11, 1033-1057, <https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-11-1033-2018>, 2018.

Kutzbach, J. E. and Gallimore, R. G.: Sensitivity of a coupled atmosphere/mixed layer ocean model to changes in orbital forcing at 9000 years B.P, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 93, 803-821, <https://doi.org/10.1029/JD093iD01p00803>, 1988.

Kutzbach, J. E. and Otto-Bliesner, B. L.: The sensitivity of the African-Asian monsoonal climate to orbital parameter changes for 9000 years B.P. in a low-resolution general circulation model, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 39, 1177-1188, [https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1982)039<1177:TSOTAA>2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1982)039%3c1177:TSOTAA%3e2.0.CO;2), 1982.

Liu, Z., Otto-Bliesner, B. L., He, F., Brady, E. C., Tomas, R., Clark, P. U., Carlson, A. E., Lynch-Stieglitz, J., Curry, W., Brook, E., Erickson, D., Jacob, R., Kutzbach, J., and Cheng, J.: Transient simulation of last deglaciation with a new mechanism for Bølling-Allerød warming, Science, 325, 310-314, <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1171041>, 2009.

Marsicek, J., Shuman, B. N., Bartlein, P. J., Shafer, S. L., and Brewer, S.: Reconciling divergent trends and millennial variations in Holocene temperatures, Nature, 554, 92, <https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25464>, 2018.

Otto-Bliesner, B. L., Braconnot, P., Harrison, S. P., Lunt, D. J., Abe-Ouchi, A., Albani, S., Bartlein, P. J., Capron, E., Carlson, A. E., Dutton, A., Fischer, H., Goelzer, H., Govin, A., Haywood, A., Joos, F., LeGrande, A. N., Lipscomb, W. H., Lohmann, G., Mahowald, N., Nehrbass-Ahles, C., Pausata, F. S. R., Peterschmitt, J. Y., Phipps, S. J., Renssen, H., and Zhang, Q.: The PMIP4 contribution to CMIP6 -- Part 2: Two interglacials, scientific objective and experimental design for Holocene and Last Interglacial simulations, Geosci. Model Dev., 10, 3979-4003, <https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-10-3979-2017>, 2017.

Pollard, D. and Reusch, D. B.: A calendar conversion method for monthly mean paleoclimate model output with orbital forcing, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 107, ACL 3-1-ACL 3-7, <https://doi.org/10.1029/2002JD002126>, 2002.

Saha, S., Moorthi, S., Pan, H.-L., Wu, X., Wang, J., Nadiga, S., Tripp, P., Kistler, R., Woollen, J., Behringer, D., Liu, H., Stokes, D., Grumbine, R., Gayno, G., Wang, J., Hou, Y.-T., Chuang, H.-y., Juang, H.-M. H., Sela, J., Iredell, M., Treadon, R., Kleist, D., Delst, P. V., Keyser, D., Derber, J., Ek, M., Meng, J., Wei, H., Yang, R., Lord, S., Dool, H. v. d., Kumar, A., Wang, W., Long, C., Chelliah, M., Xue, Y., Huang, B., Schemm, J.-K., Ebisuzaki, W., Lin, R., Xie, P., Chen, M., Zhou, S., Higgins, W., Zou, C.-Z., Liu, Q., Chen, Y., Han, Y., Cucurull, L., Reynolds, R. W., Rutledge, G., and Goldberg, M.: The NCEP Climate Forecast System Reanalysis, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 91, 1015-1058, <https://doi.org/10.1175/2010BAMS3001.1>, 2010.

Timm, O., Timmermann, A., Abe-Ouchi, A., Saito, F., and Segawa, T.: On the definition of seasons in paleoclimate simulations with orbital forcing, Paleoceanography, 23, <https://doi.org/10.1029/2007PA001461>, 2008.

Xie, P. and Arkin, P. A.: Global Precipitation: A 17-Year Monthly Analysis Based on Gauge Observations, Satellite Estimates, and Numerical Model Outputs, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 78, 2539-2558, [https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0477(1997)078<2539:GPAYMA>2.0.CO;2](https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0477(1997)078%3c2539:GPAYMA%3e2.0.CO;2), 1997.

Figure Captions
---------------

Figure 1: Variations over the past 150 kyr in the beginning and ending days of fixed-angular months for a 365-day "noleap" calendar, shown for 1 kyr intervals beginning at 0 ka (1950 CE). The left side of each horizontal bar shows the beginning day while the right side shows the ending day of a particular month for each 1 kyr interval. The month-length "anomalies" or differences from the present-day are shown by shading, with individual paleo months that are shorter than those at present indicated by green shades and those that are longer indicated by blue shades. The day that perihelion occurs for each 1 kyr interval is indicated by a magenta dot, and the overall pattern of month-length anomalies can be seen to follow the day of perihelion.

Figure 2: As in Fig. 1, but with shading showing the variations in the difference (in days) between the mid-month day of each month and the day of the June solstice. Months that are shifted closer to the June solstice are indicated by orange hues while those that are farther away are indicated by blue. Variations in the beginning and ending days of individual months can be seen to track the climatic precession parameter (*e*∙*sin* ω, where *e* is eccentricity and ω is the longitude of perihelion measured from the vernal equinox, an index of Earth's distance from the Sun at the summer solstice), which is plotted at the right side of the figure (magenta dots). (Note that the inverse of the climatic precession parameter is plotted for easier comparison.)

Figure 3: As in Fig 1, but with shading showing calendar effects on insolation at 45°N. The differences plotted show the values of average daily insolation at mid-month days identified using the appropriate fixed-angular paleo calendar (see Fig. S2) minus those using the fixed-length definition of present-day months, with orange hues showing positive difference, and purple hues negative. Figs. S3 and S4 show differences for the equator and 45°S.

Figure 4: Calendar effects on near-surface air temperature for 6 ka (upper left), 97 ka (upper right), 127 ka (lower left) and 116 ka (lower right). The maps show the patterns of month-length adjusted average temperatures minus the unadjusted values, using 1981-2010 long-term averages of CFSR *tas* values, with positive difference (indicating that the adjusted data would be warmer than unadjusted data) in red hues, and negative differences in blue.

Figure 5: Calendar effects on the mean near-surface air temperatures of the warmest (MTWA) and coldest (MTCO) months and their differences (an index of seasonality) for 6 ka, 97 ka, 116 ka and 127 ka (top to bottom row).

Figure 6: Calendar effects on precipitation rate for 6 ka (upper left), 97 ka (upper right), 127 ka (lower left) and 116 ka (lower right). The maps show the patterns of month-length adjusted precipitation rate minus the unadjusted values, using 1981-2010 long-term averages of CMAP *precip* values, with positive difference (indicating that the adjusted data would be wetter than unadjusted data) in blue hues, and negative differences in brown.

Figure 7: Time series of original and month-length-adjusted area averages of TraCE-21k data (Liu et al., 2009), expressed as difference from the 1961-1989 long-term mean. The original or unadjusted data are plotted in gray and black, and the adjusted data in colors. The area averages are grid-cell area-weighted values for land grid points in each region, and the smoother curves are locally weighted regression curves with a window half-width of 100 years. The regions are defined as: a) 15 to 75°N and ‑170 to 60 °E, b) 10 to 50°S and 110 to 160°E, c) global ice-free land area, d) 0 to 30°N and ‑30 to 120°E, e) 5 to 17°N and ‑5 to 30°E, and f) 31 to 43°N and -5 to 30°E.

Supplemental Figure Captions
----------------------------

Figure S1: Orbital parameter variations at 1 kyr intervals over the past 150 kyr for obliquity, climatic precession, eccentricity, and day of perihelion (relative to January 1). Climatic recession is calculated as e ⋅ sin(ω), where e is eccentricity and ω is the longitude of perihelion measured from the vernal equinox.

Figure S2: As in Fig. 3, with shading showing calendar effects on insolation at the equator. The differences plotted show the values of average daily insolation at mid-month days identified using the appropriate fixed-angular paleo calendar minus those using the fixed-length definition of present-day months, with orange hues showing positive difference, and purple hues negative.

Figure S3: As in Figs. 3 and S2, with shading showing calendar effects on insolation at 45°S. The differences plotted show the values of average daily insolation at mid-month days identified using the appropriate fixed-angular paleo calendar minus those using the fixed-length definition of present-day months, with orange hues showing positive difference, and purple hues negative.

Figure S4: Present-day (1981-2010 CE) long-term mean values of monthly near-surface air temperature (*tas*) from the Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR), the mean temperatures of the warmest and coldest months and their differences from the same data, and precipitation rate (*pr*) from the CPC Merged Analysis of Precipitation (CMAP).

Figure S5: As in Fig. 3, with shading showing the long-term differences in mid-month average daily insolation (relative to present (0 ka or 1950 CE), at 45°N for a fixed-angular calendar.

Figure S6: As in Fig. S5, only for the equator.

Figure S7: As in Fig. S5, only for 45°S

Figure S8: Pseudo-daily interpolated temperature (top row) and precipitation (bottom row) for some representative locations: (a, c) Madison, Wisconsin, USA, (b) Australia, and (d) the Indian Ocean. The original monthly mean data are shown by the black dots and stepped curves (black lines), daily values linearly interpolated between the monthly mean values are shown in blue, and daily values using the mean-preserving approach of Epstein (1991) are shown in red. The annual interpolation error (or the difference between the annual average calculated using the original data and the pseudo-daily interpolated data) is given for the mean-preserving approach in each case.

Figure S9: Pseudo-daily interpolation errors for CFSR near-surface air temperature (left-hand column) and CMAP precipitation rate (right-hand column). The top set of maps shows the interpolation errors, or the differences between the original monthly mean values and the monthly mean values recalculated from linear interpolation of pseudo-daily values. The middle set of maps shows the interpolation errors for mean-preserving (Epstein, 1991) interpolation.
