## Supplemental Figures ##

The figures in this folder illustrate the calendar effects on several variables from a selection of simulations used to exercise the calendar-effect adjustment programs (`cal_adjust_PMIP.f90` (version 1) and `call_adjust.f90` (version 1.1).  Each figure has four panels:  

- the long-term-mean differences (experiment minus control, sometimes referred to as "anomalies") for each simulation calculated using adjusted paleo data (upper left); 
- the long-term-mean differences (experiment minus control) calculated using unadjusted data (upper right);
- the calendar effect, or the adjusted long-term-mean differences minus the unadjusted long-term-mean differences. For example, positive differences on this panel for near-surface air temperature (*tas*) indicate where the adjusted temperatures would be higher than unadjusted ones and negative differences indicate where adjusted temperatures would be lower than unadjusted ones, and similarly for precipitation rate (*pr*), where positive values of adjusted precipitation would be greater than unadjusted data and negative values less than unadjusted data (lower left); and
- long-term-mean difference sign reversals (which indicate regions where the magnitude of the calendar effect is large enough to reverse the sign of the long-term-mean difference) (bottom right). 

For *AClim* files, with time dimension lengths of 12, the calendar-effect maps are simple differences between adjusted and unadjusted data.  For *Amon* files, with varying time dimensions (often 1200, i.e. 100 years of monthly data), the maps show differences in the long-term means (for each month of the year, i.e. the "climatologies") of experiment-minus-control monthly values.  In other words, the *Aclim* maps show data that were averaged first, and then differenced, while the *Amon* maps are based on data that were differenced first and then averaged.

### Calendar effects ###

The figures here show "real" calendar effects on paleoclimatic simulations, in contrast to the "pure" effects shown in Figs. 11-13 of Bartlein and Shafer (2019).  There, the calendar effects were shown using present-day data, in effect assuming that experiment-minus-control long-term-mean differences were zero.  In practice, the calendar effect is influenced both by the nature of the annual cycle (with greater effects on variables with higher-amplitude annual cycles) and by the long-term-mean differences.

In the maps shown here, the range of values plotted are the same for the long-term-mean differences and for the calendar effects (except for sea-surface salinity).  This allows one to evaluate the magnitude of the calendar effect relative to the climate changes that are the focus of paleo simulations.

#### Calendar effects on temperature ####

	tas_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	tas_Aclim_CNRM-CM5_midHolocene.pdf
	tas_Aclim_MPI-ESM-P_midHolocene.pdf
		
	tas_Amon_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	tas_Amon_CNRM-CM5_midHolocene.pdf
	tas_Amon_MPI-ESM-P_midHolocene.pdf

	tas_Amon_IPSL-CM6-LR_midHolocene.pdf
	tas_Amon_IPSL-CM6-LR_lig127k.pdf

The long-term-mean differences in 2 m air temperature, *tas*, reflect the first-order effects of the insolation forcing in the *midHolocene* and *lig127* simulations (see net shortwave radiation (*rsnet*) and net radiation (*rnet*) below), modified by the greater thermal inertia of the ocean relative to that of the land.  The differences are strongly positive over land from June through November, and nearly globally positive from September through November. There are broad similarities across individual models in the calendar effects (lower left), and these resemble the "pure" calendar effects shown in Fig. 11 and 12 of Bartlein and Shafer (2019), including those for the *midHolocene* simulations as well as for a the  *lig127k* simulation of near-surface air temperature.  The larger calendar effects (lower-left) can be seen to rival in size the paleo-minus-*piControl* long-term-mean differences (upper left and upper right).  In many cases the calendar effects simply reinforce the long-term-mean differences, but in some cases they are large enough to *change the sign* of the difference (see the long-term mean difference sign-reversal panels, lower right).  

The spatial patterns of the sign-change maps for temperature have two components:  1) large, or continental-scale patches that indicate where and when during the year the calendar effect could completely reverse the sense of change between a paleo and control experiment, and 2) long looping, or hollow cell-like features that indicate where the location of zero isopleths of the long-term-mean differences are sensitive to the calendar effect, i.e. "blobular"-shaped long-term mean differences that either expand or contract after adjusting the data.  

The three *midHolocene* simulations of *tas* with *Aclim* files (CCSM4, CNRM-CM5, and MPI-ESM-P) can be compared with those with *Amon* files.  In general, the calendar-effect patterns are quite similar, with perhaps slightly stronger map patterns expressed by data from the *Amon* files, which is probably related to the order of differencing and averaging.  (This is more evident in the two *pr* simulations with both *Aclim* and *Amon* files, see below.)  However, there is little practical difference in the patterns that emerge from the two kinds of files.  The two PMIP4 simulations with IPSL-CM6A-LR, *midHolocene* and *lig127ka* show calendar-effect differences that strongly resemble those on Fig. 11 of Bartlein and Shafer despite large differences in the amplitude and sign of the long-term-mean differences, particularly in May and June.  Calendar effects on temperature are generally lower from May through August in the *mid-Holocene* simulations, but are larger in those months for the *lig127k* simulation.  This is related to the nature of the orbit at those particular times.  At 6ka, perihelion is in September, and May and June are only slightly shorter than at present.  At 127 ka, perihelion is in early July, eccentricity is greater than at 6 ka (0.03938 vs. 0.1868), and the months of May through August are at least two days shorter than present (Fig. 1 of Bartlein and Shafer, 2019).  Smaller calendar effects during the boreal summer are a pervasive feature of the *midHolocene* simulations relative to *lig127k* ones.

Overall, the calendar effect for temperature shows very strong interhemispheric contrasts, as well as noticeable land-ocean contrasts, particularly from September through January.  The sense of the effect on temperature during these months, positive in the Northern Hemisphere, negative in the Southern, could, if not adjusted for, give the reader a sense of reduced interhemispheric contrast in these simulations relative to present. In particular, the impression of large positive long-term-mean differences at high Southern Hemisphere latitudes in the austral spring and summer is reduced in the adjusted data, while the land-ocean contrast becomes amplified in the adjusted data in the Northern Hemisphere. 

Comparisons among the different *tas* simulations suggests that the calendar effects vary little among models with larger amplitude "experiment-minus-control" long-term-mean differences and those with smaller amplitude differences. This implies that adjusting for the calendar effect does not suppress or inflate inter-model (or inter "warm-climate" experiment) differences (although this is a very small sample, both in terms of number of models and variables).

#### Calendar effects on radiation energy-balance variables ####

	rsnet_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	rlnet_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	rnet_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	hfls_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	hfss_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf

[Note: We use the following the sign convention for radiative and non-radiative fluxes:  for radiative fluxes (net shortwave radiation, net longwave radiation, and net radiation) positive values are flows toward the surface and negative values are flows away from the surface, while for non-radiative fluxes flows away from the surface (to the atmosphere) are positive, and flows toward the surface are negative.]

The calendar effect on net shortwave radiation, *rsnet*, shows spatially coherent interhemispheric contrasts (that, not surprisingly, resemble those for temperature).  This reflects the relatively smooth global patterns of the long-term-mean differences, but with the noticable negative differences in the northern monsoon regions from June through October (related to increased cloudiness there).  The adjustment reverses the sign of the long-term mean difference in the northern hemisphere mid-to-high latitudes in September and October. Boreal summer months are shorter than at present at 6 ka (Figure 1 of Bartlein and Shafer, 2019), which moves the beginning of those months about four days closer to the June solstice (Figure 2 of Bartlein and Shafer, 2019), which consequently increases the monthly averages of insolation at the top of the atmosphere in those months.  

The long-term-mean differences in net longwave radiation *rlnet* display highly spatially variable patterns, reflecting a combination of cloudiness and air temperature:  northern monsoon regions show positive differences from June through October owing to greater cloud cover than in the *piControl* simulation, while continents in both hemispheres show negative differences from June through September, reflecting higher surface temperatures and less cloud cover than in the *piControl* simulations.  The calendar effect on *rlnet* shows prominent land-ocean contrasts (that switch sign between hemispheres) from September through November.  The calendar effect reverses the sign of the long-term-mean differences, particularly in September and October. Net radiation *rnet*, shows long-term-mean differences that are dominated by those of net shortwave radiation, and the same is true for the calendar effect and pattern of sign reversal in long-term-mean differences.

The long-term-mean differences in sensible heat flux *hfss* have patterns that are similar to, but are the mirror-image of those of net long-wave radiation *rlnet*; both are consistent with greater energy flow from the surface and reduced flow from the atmosphere where and when the *hfss* difference is positive and the *rlnet* difference is negative.  The calendar effect, and long-term mean difference sign-change patterns of these two variables are also mirror images.  Like those for temperature, these patterns are most strongly expressed between August and December.  

Latent heat flux has perhaps the most spatially complex patterns of long-term-mean differences.  This is not unexpected because latent heat flux is controlled by both the nature of the surface, land vs. ocean, and over land by water availability, and finally by net radiation.  The calendar effect on latent heat flux features strong land-ocean contrasts, again most strongly expressed from August through December, but there are also strong interhemispheric differences during these months; in the Northern Hemisphere there is a positive effect over the continents and a negative effect over the northern oceans, with a reversal in the sign of the effect in the Southern Hemisphere.  The reversal in sign of the long-term-mean differences of latent heat flux also show considerable spatial variability, echoing that of the differences themselves.  

There are thus three "styles" of calendar effects among the radiation and energy-balance variables:  1) strong interhemispheric contrasts in net shortwave and in turn net radiation, 2) strong land-ocean contrasts in net longwave radiation and sensible heat flux, and 3) a combination of interhemispheric and land-ocean contrasts in the calendar effect on latent heat flux.   

#### Calendar effects on atmospheric circulation-related variables ####

	zg_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	psl_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	wap_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	clt_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf

The long-term-mean differences of 500 hPa height, *zg*, resemble the broad-scale patterns of temperature change, *tas*,  greater-than-present values, particularly in the Northern Hemisphere, beginning in July and lasting through November, and pervasive less-than-present values in both variables from February through June.  There are some important differences between variables.  Whereas *tas* shows strong land-ocean contrasts in the Northern Hemisphere from July through October, these are less apparent in the 500 hPa height differences.  The calendar effects on 500 hPa height also echo those of temperature, but are spatially smoother.  They nevertheless show evident interhemispheric contrasts from September through December, and as was the case for *tas* the calendar effects reverse the sign of the long-term mean difference in both hemispheres, particularly from October through December.

Sea-level pressure, *psl* long-term-mean differences also reflect those of temperature, but emphasize the land-ocean contrast component of the temperature differences.  These pressure differences, particularly the negative differences over the Northern Hemisphere continents beginning in June and still evident in September, and the positive differences in the boreal winter (December through March) are an element of the global monsoon circulation.  The calendar effect on sea-level pressure appears as land-ocean contrasts (strongly negative over land) from August through December.  The adjustment tends to maintain negative long-term-mean differences over North America and East Asia later into the autumn (i.e. November).

The long-term-mean differences of 500 hPa vertical velocity (i.e. "omega", *wap*) display spatially complex patterns. In the tropics and subtropics, they can be seen as the large-scale vertical component of the changes in the monsoon circulation described by the differences in *psl*, (including, over the northern continents in the summer, rising motions associated with the mid-continental "heat lows", sinking motions in the expanded subtropical high-pressure systems and changes in the location of the ITCZ). The pattern of sign-change in the long-term mean differences between adjusted and non-adjusted data is quite chaotic, showing a greater tendency toward small-scale features, as opposed to large continental-scale patches, reflecting the smaller spatial scale of the long-term-mean differences.  The long-term-mean differences in total cloud fraction, *clt*, closely resemble those of *wap*, as do the calendar effects.  There is one large patch of sign-change in the *clt* long-term mean difference in Europe in October that does not show up in *wap*, but the magnitude of the difference is small in that region.

#### Calendar effects on precipitation ####

	pr_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	pr_Amon_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	pr_Amon_MPI-ESM-P_midHolocene.pdf

Not surprisingly, the long-term-mean differences in precipitation resemble those for vertical velocity (*wap*) and clouds (*clt*) for the simulation in common.  In general, the pattern of the differences are again consistent with the large-scale circulation differences in the subtropics and tropics noted above. The three *midHolocene* precipitation-rate simulations generally show smaller spatial-scale long-term mean difference sign-reversal patterns than for temperature, reflecting both the smaller spatial scale of the map-patterns of precipitation, and the tendency for the long-term-mean differences to show a combination of amplification and damping of broad-scale features (like the monsoons) in place, as well as some shifts in the location of features.  For example, the calendar-effect maps show a consistent pattern of decreases in N. African monsoon precipitation in the adjusted data in July and August, and increases in September, October and November.  In contrast to temperature, these changes do not produce sign changes in the long-term-mean differences that are of continental scale and consistent from month to month.  Instead, the calendar effect on precipitation reinforces the long-term-mean differences, particularly in the northern monsoon regions in late summer and autumn (August through November).  At smaller scales, the sign-change patterns are still large enough to influence data-model comparisons at regional scales.

#### Calendar effects on SSTs, sea-ice and salinity variables ####

	tos_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	sic_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf
	sic_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene_polar.pdf
	sos_Aclim_CCSM4_midHolocene.pdf

Owing to the similarity of sea-surface temperature, *tos*, and 2-m air temperature, *tas*, (over the ice-free ocean) the patterns of long-term-mean differences and calendar effects are similar for these variables.  Sea-ice long-term-mean differences show some longitudinal variability, but the main patterns include generally less sea ice in the Northern Hemisphere in summer and autumn (August through October), and more sea ice extending to lower latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere throughout much of the year but especially from March through June.  In both hemispheres, with a few exceptions (June in the Northern Hemisphere, October and Novermber in the Southern Hemisphere) the calendar effect amplifies the long-term-mean differences between the mid-Holocene and present.  In Southern Hemisphere, this results in a ring-like pattern of changes in sign of long-term-mean differences from negative to positive at the lower latitude margin of the sea ice around Antarctica. 

Sea-surface salinity, *sos*, provides a good demonstration of the role that the amplitude of the annual cycle has on the calendar effect. Relative to all of the other variables, amplitude of the annual cycle of *sos* is very small.  The long-term-mean differences have a distinct pattern, with lower salinity (than present) in the Arctic, North and tropical Atlantic and tropical Indian Oceans, and higher salinity elsewhere, but there is little month-to-month variation in those differences.  As a consequence, the calendar effect on sea-surface salinity is at least three orders of magnitude smaller than the long-term-mean differences. However, it is still contourable, and in the Southern Hemisphere from November through January produces nearly circum-hemispheric reversals in sign of the long-term-mean differences.

### Discussion ###

Across all of the variables and simulations considered here, calendar effects appear large enough to influence the interpretation of experiment-minus-control differences in simulations.  Many variables exhibit calendar effects that can obliterate, or even reverse the sign of the differences, but some can also reinforce or amplify the differences.  Calendar-effect patterns are generally quite spatially variable, featuring both interhemispheric (N-S) and land-ocean contrasts, as well smaller-scale features that result from the superimposition of effects on related variables.  Calendar-effect patterns that feature strong interhemispheric patterns are typical of variables that are strongly influenced by insolation, including (obviously) net shortwave radiation and net radiation, as well as temperature (*tas* and *tos*), and variables that are influenced by hemispheric-average temperatures like 500 hPa height.  Land-ocean contrasts in the calendar-effect patterns appear in variables that are influenced by the gross difference in surface characteristics between land and ocean, and by their differential heat-storage capacities.  Temperature is again typical, as is well as net longwave radiation, latent and sensible heat flux, and sea-level pressure.

The potential for calendar effects to amplify long-term-mean differences can be seen for precipitation rate (and some extent to the related variables vertical velocity and clouds) particularly in the Northern Hemisphere African-Asian monsoon region, in late summer, autumn and early winter.  There, the long-term-mean difference in precipitation in unadjusted data is positive, but is even more so in the adjusted data; however, there are locations in that region, where the sign of differences is reversed by the adjustment in November and December.  

The size and patterns of the calendar effects should be concerning, because they rival some of the features in long-term-mean differences between paleo and control experiments that could easily be interpreted in terms of some specific mechanisms.  Land-ocean contrasts are basis of the standard (i.e.  Kutzbach) model of Holocene climate evolution, and its expression in the strength of the monsoons and in mid-continental aridity.  Interhemispheric contrasts during the Holocene obviously have a basis in the latitudinal and seasonal distribution of insolation, but could also be attributed to variations in AMOC or ocean-atmosphere interactions.

Although the importance of adjusting for the calendar effect has been brought up repeatedly over the past 40 yrs, it is still not routinely attempted (see Section 1 of Bartlein and Shafer, 2019).  Several things may account for this: 1) temperature is the main focus of PMIP experiments and data-model comparisons, 2) model-output temperatures are usually characterized by January, July and annual values, 3) likewise, various "proxy" indicators of past climates have been calibrated in terms of July and January temperatures (or summer and and winter ones), and 4) as it happens, owing to the nature of the orbit, calendar effects on temperature in January and July are small, at least for the orbital configurations of the past 10 - 20 kyr.  However, other variables, including precipitation, do have noticeable calendar effects in January or July, so it is perhaps fortuitous that we happened to evolve enough to do climate simulations and data-model comparisons during the late Holocene, as opposed to, say, the previous interglacial, or MIS 5d, when the calendar effects would have much different from the recent ones.
